Hello, Tony Byrd speaking, actually Ralph, Anthony Byrd, Tony for short,
but I was at school, I was always called Dickie. Anyway, here we go, I was born in Cowbridge,
L'Morgan in 1924. My father ran an agricultural, well it was really an ironmongry business,
which he inherited from his father, which I think was started in 1783, so it was quite a
well-established business. I was educated at Pontbine Council School in Cowbridge from the
age of about probably three until ten when my father went up to Gloucestershire to open a branch
because the Cowbridge business is doing very well and he'd been offered the franchise with the
Massey, or not then Massey, but the Ferguson tractor and he'd been offered quite a number of
counties distributed. Anyway, now that's jumping ahead a bit. I was educated at
Gnarling School's Shroud and then I went to Wycliffe College at Stonehouse, which was a
boarding school quite adjacent to our home and the school was evacuated to Lampeter
during the early part of the war because the Admiralty had taken a fancy to the school buildings
and I went to Lampeter where I stayed for three years very happily. We used to
organise shooting parties for rabbits, I remember. The local farmers were very keen, but we, of course,
we shouldn't have had guns there, but three or four of us organised little shooting parties and
we had a good time. I think my vivid memory of Lampeter was the winter of 42 when the local lake
froze up and I think we were skating up there for many, many times and we had great fun.
I played for the school at Cricket and Rugby and was contemporary with Gilbert Parkhouse,
who later became an England cricketer and a Welsh rugby footballer.
While I was at Lampeter, we were visited by a naval officer who was trying to conscript
public school boys for the Navy and I actually volunteered at that time. I think I was about 17
and I attended an interview in Swansea and when I left school at the age of 18,
I was sent a letter asking to report to ACMS at Raleigh in Devonport where I spent three
arduous months marching up and down and generally being taught how to behave.
I think one of my vivid memories of that was taking rowing courses on one of the rivers
and deliberately catching the horse. We fell backwards and the chief pass officer thought
that was a really good joke and he took it in good part. Anyway, after that, I went to a
barracks in Devonport and was then sent to join a ship which was just being refitted in Harlequin
Wolf's Yard in Belfast. ACMS escapade. We were a completely new crew, the ship having been
extensively refitted after many very difficult arctic convoys and we understood from some of
the old crew that they'd been on that infamous convoy, Q17, where the Navy were totally disbanded
leaving the merchant ships to the mercy of the Germans. Whether that was actually true in essence,
I don't honestly know. Anyway, the ship we worked, we had trials after the refit and my memory there
is one of us, our steering motor failed owing to I think sabotage and we rammed a jetty which put
us back about a fortnight and then we went up to Scapa Flow to work up where we did extensive
gunnery and sea trials and we went up to Bear Island and being a sort of potential officer
material, I was posted as a lookout on the bridge where we were able to observe the operation of the
ship as a whole. While working up, I was asked to spot the port of Shot when we were
undertaking gunnery files at day and night. Anyway, we did some Atlantic convoys and we were
then detailed to accompany a huge fleet of ships going down to North Africa for the operation Torch
which was a joint American British invasion of North Africa. I always remember we were escorting
HMS Furious, the aircraft carrier, and she was taking a pretty rough trip going down to the Bay
of Biscay and I always remember Seafarers taking off her deck. The deck must have been at angles
of 15 to 20 degrees and how the pilots ever got the things done I don't honestly know.
But after Operation Torch, we did we returned to Gibraltar and stayed there for some weeks I
remember and then we went back to Scapa Flow, did a couple of Atlantic convoys and I left the ship
in January 1943 having been asked to attend the training college at Brighton HMS Alfred.
Anyway, I went to HMS Alfred and was promoted to temporary midshipman but that was,
I remember rescinded, they wrote in my paybook promoted to temporary midshipman RNVR
but the captain Pelly was in charge he sent for me he said I think that you're a bit too young
to go see as a midshipman I think I'm going to send you back for further training at sea.
So that's what happened but well I was then in Devonport dockyard, the barracks, and a fleet order
appeared on the notice board asking for people to volunteer as fleet air arm pilots
and as I was at a dead end waiting for another ship and nothing seemed to be happening I volunteered
and I just went for an interview I think in Brighton for that and then reported to HMS St. Vincent
which I think was in Portsmouth where we did a three-month training course as sort of forthcoming
pilots in the fleet air arm and during that time I was put forward for what they a draft called the
Admiral Towers Scheme which meant we would be sent training to America to be trained by the marines
and that's what happened we went I went across to America and I think in about probably June,
June of 43 and went to Grosse Eagle having landed at Halifax Nova Scotia in a snowstorm I always
remember we traveled to Detroit by train and although the railway carriage had double glazing
I remember the snow was blowing in on us sleeping in our seats very very cold anyway Grosse Eagle
was an eye-opener American marine pilots trained us very very good and efficient they were mostly
young people I was taught to fly by an ensign and also by a lieutenant and but pretty young people
we I I forget we trained on trained on two wings by planes quite quite nice they're bigger than
the Tiger Moth and I went solo after about 12 hours and stayed Grosse Eagle for about three months
clocking up 50 or 60 hours of flying time but I think it was a biplane steerman very nice
air very very capable aircraft very steady it must have been for me to fly it anyway after
arriving at Grosse Eagle I think there were about 30 of us in the party we were asked to attend a
reception which is being held I think by the United Services Organization anyway at a
at a hotel in Detroit where we met with quite a number of Americans who adopted each one of
each family adopted one of us which is very good and I was adopted by the the the husband and wife
the husband being the manager of the Detroit Gas Company which is interesting anyway they they were
very very kind and every weekend if we had to leave they used to come to the base of Grosse
Eagle and pick us up and take us out you know show us sights and were very very hospitable
so that was interesting anyway after after some I I did quite a bit of flying at Grosse
Eagle I think the aircraft was steerman by planes I can't remember the model but they were
quite nice aircraft I didn't really enjoy flying I went solo after about 12 hours but I've to be
quite honest I found flying boring the the instructors were marine
American marine pilots mostly young and they were very meticulous always telling us to keep
if your engine fails where you were you going to land and all that sort of thing
and on one occasion we actually had engine failure and we landed at a farm and I remember I think
it was in the middle of a maize crop and the farmer came out in constation because we'd
ruined quite a bit of his landing and he wanted to know when he discovered I was busiest he wanted
if I just so mere dynamic which is rather amusing so this went on for some weeks
I think I did about 50 hours flying and then I was asked by Lieutenant Commander Jackson R.M. to
report to his office where he advised me that I was going to leave the course and would
be returning to the UK to join the fleet somewhere and that happened I returned
after about a couple of weeks spent in New York which is very interesting waiting for a ship
I write back I think in granite and report it back to Davenport where I stayed for some weeks
and then was asked to report to a class corvette agent to Macy's which was stationed at Cherness
and I reported there a very very very lovely little ship very very very nice crew I think the
crew could serve probably I think totaled about 30 or 40 but they were all very very nice chaps
because a border corps had the sleeping arrangement of very very odd they had a series
of flat wooden bunks adjacent to each other in the mid part of the ship we used to we didn't have a
bunk allocated to us we if one person left we just hopped into the the the one which was available
and that went on which is very very good so after some weeks we we did
North Sea convoys and then channel convoys and we were under fire I remember from German batches on
the French coast they used to lob over shells of the convoys you were escorting in the hope of
making a hit but they never seemed to and that went on for some time but we were all aware that
there was something going to happen because there was a tremendous lot of rumours flying around about
the invasion upcoming invasion and we continued with these convoys and then we were based in
Chesnes but we used to go ashore in Southend quite a lot if we were you know in that vicinity
you know I always remember going up the tremendously long pier which we used to anchor off and then
if we had a bit of leave we would go trundle up this tremendously long causeway to town
and later to rejoin the ship about midnight which was good anyway D-Day approach we were
ordered to pick up a convoy going a guy heading for Aramon but we didn't know that at the time
and my most vivid memory of the invasion was the tremendous number of aircraft flying over as we
were going across channel there were literally hundreds of aircraft going over obviously going
in to drop their troops inland in anticipation of the invasion and we eventually arrived off a
little port called Aramon where we escorted quite a number of LCA's ashore some light fire
uh artillery fire and rifle fire but not very much and I remember I was standing on the bridges
as a lookout and a bullet whizzed past my left ear at high velocity and I said good god that
was a close one but that was the nearest I came to to fire at that time so we we proceeded to escort
ships across the we particularly remember the Mulberry Casen the big
sort of huge tanks which were acting as temporary harbors we escorted those across and also
a couple of ships with huge reels on them which turned out to be Pluto
the fuel lines and as they proceeded across the the reels disembarked their hoses and these were
eventually connected up at the Mulberry so the troops had plenty of petrol and diesel at their
command so this went on for some weeks we moved from beach to beach and at that time or some
little time later the Germans started firing their rockets over at particularly at London
this is the v1s what they called the v1 yeah and I had the great
honor of shooting one down um with an oricon which the the the rocket actually grazed
Dungeness lighthouse and exploded so I was very glad it didn't hit the lighthouse otherwise I was
being court-martialed I would think but the Americans were particularly good
at flying alongside these these rockets and tipping their wings over so that they they lost their
sense of direction and plunged to earth exploding in in the sea or on land particularly the the
army put up a most tremendous barrage at night the whole of the coast was alive with with gunfire
shooting at these rockets and they were quite successful in shooting a number down but
unfortunately a lot as we all know got through to London causing tremendous havoc and then the v2
started going which we couldn't we didn't know about it heard about that they they they were
beyond human intervention they used to land unexpectedly causing untold damage so there we
are I've got a listen I've got the invasion behind me uh we we've encountered the rockets
and then yes what occurred then sometime I was asked to report to HMS King Alfred Brighton which
was a training school for potential officers and I went there and did a three-month course
and was commissioned as a sub lieutenant RNBR temporary in brackets and joined
joined uh we were set up to decline to fairfields yard at govern to join us a landing ship tank
which was in course of construction at that yard I was the first officer to report
to commander bell who was eventually to become for a leader of a flotilla of 10
LSTs and the first job he gave me the worst he said dicky I want you to we are going out to the
far east I want you to get as much booze as you can in the wardroom locker wine store so I spent
many days going around Glasgow to various whiskey distilleries trying to catch cases of scotch
out of them and to be honest it's quite successful because we when we eventually
say that the wine locker was particularly full commander bell he was a heaps of big chap about
66 heavily built excellent seaman had been in been in the far east under uh commanding oil vessels
before the war but he was a tremendous drinker in harbor he never touched a drop at sea but in
harbor he used to go you know he used to go quite heavily on the bottom stuff and he used to try
and get the his young sub lieutenant drunk so that he could tease them and allocate them difficult
tasks it was so I stood by this LST for about probably two or three weeks
limited on a Glasgow family and I always remember they had a daughter
who I think was trying to trying to seduce me but I avoided her advances very fortunately
anyway we sailed a sail for the far east I think the ship was uh flotilla leader but we
they were building the ships at that time we didn't have maybe sailed for Plymouth in company with
one other LST and we had only three officers aboard at that particular time so it was watch
on watch and as a very inexperienced sub lieutenant I felt my responsibilities very heavily but
nothing under war transpired and we safely arrived at Plymouth where we picked up I think
seven or eight other officers including a doc who doctor who being recently recently commissioned
he was our NBR and he his father was a very prominent surgeon in London and he turned out
to be an absolutely marvelous chap you're capable of carrying out all sorts of difficult operations
at sea as I'll recount later and we eventually sailed the far east in company with I think three
other LSTs proceeding through the bay land arriving at Gibraltar where we oiled ship pretty slow
after the corvettes are not fast vessels but they used to average about 15 knots the LSTs we used to
average voyage speed was about 10 knots which is very very slow really in comparison
to a destroyer which I also had experience of an important anecdote has come to mind regarding my
service on HMS Escapade during an Atlantic convoy we needed oil so we proceeded to the Azores
to do so the Azores being a Portuguese owned and neutral at the time and we oiled and I recall
loading up with the ship loading up with a tremendous number of pineapple pineapple which were
in production on the Azores at that time quite heavily we loaded the ship up and I think they
kept us going for about 10 days until we got to got back to harbor in the UK anyway while we we
oiled and then left left about midday and as we were leaving to our amazement a German U-boat
was entering the harbor and we the officers saluted each other and all the ratings were
waving at each other we were quite astounded of course we realized that the the island being
neutral it could accommodate warships of any nation and that's what occurred
anyway that was an interesting experience and it made me think how futile war really was because
we here we were waving to people who were the next day would like to blow us out of the water
so having having arrived at jib we were ordered to proceed to Naples to pick up some Sherman
rotation tanks for the oncoming invasion of Malaya which was the intention of the British
governments and the Americans of course this was the bringing about the downfall of Japan
we discovered that the operation was called operation zipper and we were to land in the
land at some date in the future and we were picking up these tanks from Naples which are then
surplus to requirements the the German war having finished some weeks before
so we picked up 14 Sherman tanks we were in company then I think with five other LSTs of
Argentina and proceeded to Aden and then to Suez through the canal and across the Indian Ocean
the only episode of note there being one of the LSTs one of their ratings suffered appendicitis
and we had to transfer lieutenant Roxburgh by boat to the other LST with very very heavy seas
running so we successfully transferred him with great difficulty I let you know but
we couldn't recover our boat because the sea conditions were too bad so we the crew had to
jump up scrambling nets to come aboard again and we sank our lovely motorboat by gunfire so it
wouldn't be a hazard to other shipping and we then proceeded not Roxburgh couldn't
couldn't rejoin our ship so we left him aboard the other LST until we reached Bombay where we
refueled I discovered when we were in Aden the captain commander Bell thought it would be very
nice if we had some form of transport and I remember surreptitiously a jeep being
wholly being landed aboard us I think it was stolen of course but it landed on our in one
of our holes and so he was determined to have transport of his own and it turned out that I
was the only chap aboard only officer aboard who could drive which is rather astonishing but this
was in year 43 or 44 and I was commissioned to take him with this jeep to naval headquarters in
Bombay to pick up our orders and driving through the streets of Bombay in a jeep with which I was
very familiar was quite a feat of engineering because the Indians they just would not take any
notice or give way to road traffic so we stayed in in Bombay for a couple of weeks made honorary
members of the Saturday Club which was an exclusive club which the Brits seemed to establish in all
ports where we played tennis and I always recall that instead of having two you know the the
Indians they they they love helping other people instead of having two ball boys or one ball boy
playing tennis they used to have about six so we didn't have to stoop to pick up a ball or
anything like that which is great anyway we had a lovely time in Bombay and then sailed for
Calcutta which would turn out to be our base and we landed there in company by this time I think
we all had eight eight other LSDs in company and we landed there doing various exercises off
of Calcutta and then we were detailed to go up to Rangoon for some reason to
but I think deliver some Indian troops to the Burmese war our next port of call
proved to be Aden and we entertained our passengers with shoots quizzes and deck games to keep up
morale we left Aden on 7th April 46 foot passage to the UK calling at port side Oran and and
Drogota the only notable events during the voyage were the recovery of a man overboard by LSD-3007
which took only 15 minutes a really good recovery our diversion to Oran to land seriously of failure
sailors soldier honor who happily we recovered who happily recovered we later heard to much
jubilation by all on board we birthed at Spithead on 30th of April 1946 and the ship finally paid
off there the total number of miles completed by LSD-307 during his commission amounted to 34,968
and over 3,000 troops and civilians 480 tanks and vehicles and 3,800 tons of stores
which delivered to strategic destinations during that time the ability of MSTs
to reach virtually anywhere their shallow draft and vast storage spaces ensured their gainful
deployment in all phases of operation and this was fully illustrated in both the European and
Far Eastern campaigns on leaving the Navy in August 46 I joined the family agriculture
engineering businesses in Boston and Stafford dealing in Ferguson and Massey had its equipment
of all types in 2015 I was invited to apply for a French decoration and was honoured on returning
from a trip abroad to find a letter from the French Embassy in London enclosing the medal in
and signature chevalier de la liga donnaire which was a tremendous surprise and what a really fine
gesture on the part of the French I thought and that's about brings it to an end too